Kip-202: Candidate and Validator Evaluation (#27)
kaiachain/kips: KIPs/kip-227.md

### 1\. Proposal Failure Score (PFS)

**Definition**: The Proposal Failure Score (PFS) measures the number of times a validator fails to propose a block successfully.

**Measurement Method**: If a validator fails to propose a block, resulting in a round change, the proposal failure count increases by one .

**Consensus Method**: The proposer of block `N+1` records the proposal failure information of block `N` in the form of a list of `(round number, proposer)` within the block header. Validators compare their own records of proposal failures in block `N` with the records in the header of block `N+1` to reach consensus.

### 2\. Message Transmission Failure Score (MFS)

The Message Transmission Failure Score is divided into two components:

a. **Total Message Transmission Failure Score (TMFS)**

b. **Consecutive Message Transmission Failure Score (CMFS)**

#### 2.1 Total Message Transmission Failure Score (TMFS)

**Definition**: Measures the number of times a candidate fails to transmit the expected `CandidateReady` message during a block proposal cycle, after removing the highest `F` of the failure counts to address measurement distortions.

> **Measurement Method**: During the evaluation period, if the next proposer `N+1` receives a block proposal from proposer `N` and does not receive the `CandidateReady` message within the specified timeout (`CANDIDATE_READY_TIMEOUT`), the total failure count for `C` increases by 1\.

Author: We commit `mfReport`/`crReport` in `N+1` to protect block time for `N`. If embedded in `N`, the proposer must wait up to `CANDIDATE_READY_TIMEOUT` before finalizing the header, which delays block time.  
By committing in `N+1`, we keep block `N` production on time and treat candidate readiness as an asynchronous measurement artifact that can be recorded in the next block without delaying block time.

## VRank Score Components

The VRank framework evaluates node performance using three independent metrics. Metrics reset at the epoch start block. These metrics apply separately to validators and candidates, allowing for a more focused assessment of each role's responsibilities.

### 1\. Proposal Failure Score (PFS)

**Definition**: The Proposal Failure Score (PFS) measures the number of times a validator fails to propose a block successfully.

**Measurement Method**: If a validator fails to propose a block, resulting in a round change, the proposal failure count increases by one.

**Consensus Method**: The proposer of block `N` MUST record the proposal failure information of block `N` in the `pfReport` field of the block header at height `N`, as an ordered list of `(round number, proposer)` for each failed round. Validators MUST compare `pfReport(N)` with their local round-change record for block `N` to reach consensus.

> **Score (Aggregation)**: For epoch index `k`, PFS MUST be computed from headers `H ∈ [k*EPOCH_LENGTH, (k+1)*EPOCH_LENGTH - 1]` by counting each validator's proposal failures from `pfReport`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Score (Aggregation)**: For epoch index `k`, PFS MUST be computed from headers `H ∈ [k*EPOCH_LENGTH, (k+1)*EPOCH_LENGTH - 1]` by counting each validator's proposal failures from round information of `header.ExtraData`.
```
